Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
Although he appeared in print for the first time in 1969 with a short story in the Science
Fiction Magazine Galaxy, Haldeman gained tremendous popularity when he came out with his multi-award
winning novel, The Forever War.
The novel was serialized in astounding science fiction, starting in 1972, then released as
a book in 1974.
The Forever War is similar to Robert Heinlein's book Starship Troopers, in that both have
intergalactic war, powered body armor, and highly advanced weapons as common elements.
Differences between the books show up in the way the authors treat war.
Heinlein's conflict was sort of a John Wayne-style battle with the bad guys, whereas Haldeman's
dealt with the emotions and reactions of his characters to the war they fought.
We asked Haldeman if the resemblance was intentional.
But no, if there is any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year, because
it's an expansion into a science fiction universe of the notions that I was trying to express
in mainstream novel.
Haldeman has a background in physics and astronomy, and told us about how he uses his hard science
background in his work.
Well, I try to use it to make the worlds that are in the event more believable, at least
to me, since I do have a background in science and engineering.
I think, well, the writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's making
up these stories, and it's easier for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific
foundation.
Even though my science is rather old fashioned and probably rather sloppy by our real scientists'
standards, it's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled its function.
In the Forever War, the soldiers experience time dilation when they travel to and from
the war zone.
That means that due to the tremendous velocity of their spaceships, dozens of years have passed
on Earth, while only a few months have passed for the soldiers on the spaceships.
Haldeman told us how he used hard science to evoke some of the feeling the soldiers have.
It goes deeper than just description, the time dilation in the Forever War.
It's scientifically accurate.
Its main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate how the soldiers who fight
a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be protecting.
It's using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something that happens to every soldier.
I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was suddenly plunged into what was an alien
culture, even though I'd only been a soldier for two years.
A lot of things had changed.
It's not a great thing to come back, there were no victory parades and that sort of thing.
It's a great thing to come back to.
Join us next time when we continue our interview with Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Cruz.
Today we'll be continuing our interview with author Joe Haldeman. It was mentioned in the
previous program that Haldeman served in Vietnam and uses that experience in some of his stories.
For instance, in one of his stories, he tells of a soldier who is severely hurt by a laser
mine. We asked Haldeman if that was drawn from his own experiences.
Well, I was wounded pretty severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for six months and it was
a boog-o-trap. I didn't set it off, somebody else did, but it was a pretty big one. I had
over 200 separate wounds, but managed to come out of it all right after a few months of
physical therapy. So, yeah, I draw on that experience. The one you're talking about is
a mind of his own. But I think I've got other short stories like the private war, private
jaco, the draw on that memory. We wondered if he was exercising demons by writing about
that experience. I don't know whether I am or not. I think I'm just using available material.
I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction.
We asked if being in Vietnam had any other effects on his writing.
Being in the army had an important effect on my writing, aside from war, because I met a whole new
class of people. That is all of my friends while I was growing up tended to be white, middle
class, upper middle class kids. There were successors, white, middle class, upper class
scientists, so forth. It was just a mundane revelation to find that people who came from
different backgrounds still had an awful lot in common with me. Most of the guys in my
combat outfit were urban black high school or junior high school dropouts. They got along
quite well. Haldeman has written two novels and edited one anthology, all dealing with
war, but by no means should you consider him just a writer of war stories. That's right,
he writes about what happens to people who are placed in that type of violent situation.
He seems to be exploring what makes his characters tick more than the situations surrounding
the characters. One of the themes in his work is man or mankind being changed when facing
conflict. We ask Haldeman to respond to that.
I think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis changes people, sometimes
radically for the worse, and that people who are totally dehumanized by war. But speaking
racially, I don't think you could make such a broad statement. What's behind some of the
things I'm writing is the hope that human nature eventually may improve to the point
where we won't have wars. We can find other ways to settle our differences.
In his novel All My Sins Remembered, the main character is red-taped and shuffled into doing
something that he is diametrically opposed to. When he rebels against the situation, he
is terminated. The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's identity,
and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy. When he becomes an
efficient tool, he's scrapped. The main character ends up being a spy for the government and
carrying out covert operations for them. And he does them more or less against his will,
that is to say, through very advanced techniques of conditioning. He's turned into a thoroughly
different person. He was a Buddhist, a pacifist when he started out. He did not get the job
he signed up for. They twisted him around into being a killing machine.
If all this makes Haldeman sound like a pessimist, well, he's not that either. Join us next time
when we find out more about Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Cruz. Today we continue our interview with author Joe Haldeman.
So far in our conversation with Haldeman, we've discussed how he used his experiences in Vietnam
in his writing and some of his early works. Now we're going to look at his writing style
in two particular stories. A short story to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal and a novel,
Mindbridge. Haldeman tells these stories by using narratives by the main characters in the stories,
reports by them and others, portions of books written long after the time set in the story
and other non-standard writing techniques. We asked him if he got the ideas for this type of style
when he was attending the Iowa Writers Conference.
Oh, not really. The connection is with John Doe's process, actually.
I read the U.S. H. Relate some years before at Mindbridge and really was impressed by the way it worked
and thought it would work really well in science fiction. So I tried it out in a rather long short story
to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal. And it looked like it would work, so I went ahead and applied it to Mindbridge.
I did do most of that book while I was studying at Iowa, and that's why I had the dedication.
The authors at the Iowa Writers Conference were, for the most part, not science fiction writers.
We asked Haldeman about their reaction to his being a science fiction author.
Well, they were a little apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when I joined the workshop.
So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not science fiction.
And some of them were outwardly hostile towards science fiction, such as Stanley Elkin.
Others were anywhere between apprehensive and slightly sympathetic.
Stephen Becker, one of them, had actually had a few pieces in the magazine Fantasy and Science Fiction.
In general, though, they thinly disguised the attitude that the stuff was just commercial fiction, and therefore beneath contempt.
That's an attitude I've never understood. Some of the world's finest literature is science fiction.
We asked Haldeman what he thought about that type of attitude.
But the field is judged by its worst, not by its best. And people like that think of science fiction.
They think in terms of great D-movies and Lazy Television. They've never read much of the best of the field.
Using science fiction is possible to consider various aspects of mankind's future.
And science fiction is the only literary form to speculate about the future.
We asked Haldeman if he thought that mankind might be radically different in the future.
I think it's quite possible, even say within the span of a century,
so many of the things that determine human nature are things that can be mitigated by technology.
Such as the problem of dying so soon.
That is, it's possible that in a couple of generations, a century, two centuries, maybe a thousand years, maybe as long as we care to,
that will radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off of individuals.
The other or other less sanguine notions is possible that sciences and communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control.
It will be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has been induced by his own society.
Sort of a sophisticated life-long brainwashing doesn't seem too unlikely.
And you can argue that it's happening now.
Join us next time when we wrap up our interview with Joe Haldeman and find out how he got involved with Star Trek.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And David Cruz. And today we're going to wrap up our interview with author Joe Haldeman.
Haldeman has been involved in two multi-book series, one called Atar the Merman, and the other was Star Trek from the TV series.
Although he enjoyed writing the first of his three Atar books, the ones that followed had nowhere to go to expand the characters.
The publisher was banking on the current popularity of dolphins and whales, but the series never took hold and Haldeman's third book was never published.
The Star Trek novels were a different sort of challenge, as Haldeman explains.
Haldeman had to work out some other problems first.
He was asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work, and he said, why don't you give it a try.
Jim was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning them into short stories, whereas they wanted me to do what Jim would have done if he had lived,
which was write original novels around the Star Trek characters.
Writing these novels was more than just sitting down and coming up with something for Spock, McCoy, and Kirk to do.
Haldeman had to work out some other problems first.
One of Haldeman's latest projects is a trilogy, of which the first book, Worlds, is already out.
Haldeman gave us a little background on that novel.
It was born and grew up on a space colony, a space settlement.
It is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate work or finishing, if you want to call it that.
Being set up for a political position as a liaison between this world and Earth, and various strange things happened to her in the year that she's here.
It's sort of an old Yeldon Suramann kind of a novel.
She grows by being sort of bounced around by Earth.
And the second novel, Stars, takes over for the first one in and takes her into all age.
It seems as if a lot of authors are writing trilogies these days, and we wondered why Haldeman decided to write one.
Well, it seems like an awfully big thing to put into one book.
And it looks as if each one of the trilogy, each volume of the trilogy will be longer than any other book that was written by us.
At least a third, if you want so indeed, it would have been a book nearly a half million words long.
So, right, they're difficult to sell.
And I just, you know, everybody's doing trilogies, so I can't I do a trilogy too, it's part of it.
They're very successful.
The second and third books have a built-in audience.
Also, I wanted to try something big.
And that's as good a reason as any.
We've discussed in the previous sections of this interview that Haldeman's main concern is storytelling.
He develops interesting characters and sets them in a believable scientific background.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.